
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html lang=en>
<head>
<meta charset=utf-8>
<title>Publishing Community Group: Plenary Session &ndash; 15 February 2024</title>
<meta name=viewport content="width=device-width">
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" title="2018" href="https://www.w3.org/StyleSheets/scribe2/public.css">
<link rel="alternate stylesheet" type="text/css" title="2004" href="https://www.w3.org/StyleSheets/base.css">
<link rel="alternate stylesheet" type="text/css" title="2004" href="https://www.w3.org/StyleSheets/public.css">
<link rel="alternate stylesheet" type="text/css" title="2004" href="https://www.w3.org/2004/02/minutes-style.css">
<link rel="alternate stylesheet" type="text/css" title="Fancy" href="https://www.w3.org/StyleSheets/scribe2/fancy.css">
<link rel="alternate stylesheet" type="text/css" title="Typewriter" href="https://www.w3.org/StyleSheets/scribe2/tt-member.css">
</head>

<body>
<header>
<p><a href="https://www.w3.org/"><img src="https://www.w3.org/StyleSheets/TR/2016/logos/W3C" alt=W3C border=0 height=48 width=72></a></p>

<h1>
Publishing Community Group: Plenary Session</h1>
<h2>15 February 2024</h2>

<nav id=links>
<a href="https://www.w3.org/events/meetings/aaf7944d-e567-4a18-8f49-4096f3e62990/"><img alt="Agenda." title="Agenda" src="https://www.w3.org/StyleSheets/scribe2/chronometer.png"></a>
<a href="https://www.w3.org/2024/02/15-publishingcg-irc"><img alt="IRC log." title="IRC log" src="https://www.w3.org/StyleSheets/scribe2/text-plain.png"></a>
</nav>
</header>

<div id=prelims>
<div id=attendees>
<h2>Attendees</h2>
<dl class=intro>
<dt>Present</dt><dd><details><summary>ashley,</summary> AvneeshSingh, CharlesL, duga, George, gpellegrino, graham, Hadrien, ivan, jeffrey_griggs, jonas_lillqvist, ken_jones, LauraB, laurent_le_meur, liisamk, miia_kirsi, mike_baker, paul_belfanti, paul_gilius, rickj, sagiv, tzviya, vincent_nicotina, wendyreid, wolfgang</details></dd>
<dt>Regrets</dt><dd>-</dd>
<dt>Chair</dt><dd>wolfgang</dd>
<dt>Scribe</dt><dd>duga, wendyreid</dd>
</dl>
</div>

<nav id=toc>
<h2>Contents</h2>
<ol>
<li><a href="#t01">Accessibility task force</a></li>
<li><a href="#t02">Anti counterfeit Task Force</a></li>
<li><a href="#t022">Fixed Layout Accessibility TF</a></li>
<li><a href="#t03">Generate reflowable fixed layout books</a></li>
<li><a href="#t04">Extracting textual content</a></li>
<li><a href="#t05">Webtoons</a></li>
</ol>
</nav>
</div>

<main id=meeting class=meeting>
<h2>Meeting minutes</h2>
<section><p id=x003 class=irc><cite>&lt;wolfgang&gt;</cite> date: 2024-02-15</p>
<p id=x019 class=irc><cite>&lt;tzviya&gt;</cite> scribe?</p>
<p id=x026 class="phone s01"><cite>wolfgang:</cite> Welcome to the plenary, starting with update with accessibility task force</p>
<p id=x027 class=irc><cite>&lt;AvneeshSingh&gt;</cite> <a href="https://w3c.github.io/publ-a11y/UX-Guide-Metadata/draft/principles/?updated">https://<wbr>w3c.github.io/<wbr>publ-a11y/<wbr>UX-Guide-Metadata/<wbr>draft/<wbr>principles/?updated</a></p>
</section>

<section>
<h3 id=t01>Accessibility task force</h3>
<p id=x038 class="phone s02"><cite>AvneeshSingh:</cite> Focus is on the guide for retailers and distributors for understanding the metadata<br>
<span id=x039>… this is an update to an existing doc</span><br>
<span id=x040>… we have found that one approach doesn't work for everyone</span><br>
<span id=x041>… so now we have different types of metadata targeted to different groups</span><br>
<span id=x042>… VitalSource and ??? have committed to implement</span><br>
<span id=x043>… We are no longer using such fixed recs, instead being a little broader</span></p>
<p id=x044 class=irc><cite>&lt;AvneeshSingh&gt;</cite> <a href="https://w3c.github.io/publ-a11y/UX-Guide-Metadata/draft/principles/?updated">https://<wbr>w3c.github.io/<wbr>publ-a11y/<wbr>UX-Guide-Metadata/<wbr>draft/<wbr>principles/?updated</a></p>
<p id=x047 class="phone s02"><cite>AvneeshSingh:</cite> There are some technique documents explaining how to extract metadata<br>
<span id=x048>… There are more technique docs coming for other types of metadata</span></p>
<p id=x049 class=irc><cite>&lt;AvneeshSingh&gt;</cite> <a href="https://www.w3.org/publishing/a11y/schema-a11y-summary/">https://<wbr>www.w3.org/<wbr>publishing/<wbr>a11y/<wbr>schema-a11y-summary/</a></p>
<p id=x050 class=irc><cite>&lt;AvneeshSingh&gt;</cite> <a href="https://www.w3.org/publishing/a11y/audio-playback/">https://<wbr>www.w3.org/<wbr>publishing/<wbr>a11y/<wbr>audio-playback/</a></p>
<p id=x052 class="phone s02"><cite>AvneeshSingh:</cite> See the two links to the docs</p>
<p id=x056 class="phone s03"><cite>George:</cite> Trying to get feedback for the schema document.<br>
<span id=x057>… There are some English strings in there, we are trying to make sure they are good in English, but we plan to add a localization method for them</span><br>
<span id=x058>… VitalSource will localize some of these</span></p>
<p id=x060 class="phone s02"><cite>AvneeshSingh:</cite> We realized there are some things on the edge of accessibility, but have broader implications<br>
<span id=x061>… We want to bring these back to the group so we only work on things people are interested in</span></p>
<p id=x063 class="phone s03"><cite>George:</cite> #70 - get citation<br>
<span id=x064>… It's hard to get a page number for citations</span></p>
<p id=x065 class=irc><cite>&lt;wendyreid&gt;</cite> <a href="https://github.com/w3c/publishingcg/issues/70">w3c/<wbr>publishingcg#70</a></p>
<p id=x066 class="phone s03"><cite>George:</cite> we want to see if the CG is interested in the feature</p>
<p id=x067 class=irc><cite>&lt;wendyreid&gt;</cite> <a href="https://github.com/w3c/publishingcg/issues/71">w3c/<wbr>publishingcg#71</a></p>
<p id=x072 class="phone s03"><cite>George:</cite> Next bookmarks, annotations and export of such<br>
<span id=x073>… There is partial support in some reading systems</span><br>
<span id=x074>… hard to compare. Purely RS, but we would test and evaluate</span><br>
<span id=x075>… #72 - read aloud</span></p>
<p id=x076 class=irc><cite>&lt;wendyreid&gt;</cite> <a href="https://github.com/w3c/publishingcg/issues/72">w3c/<wbr>publishingcg#72</a></p>
<p id=x081 class="phone s03"><cite>George:</cite> There are lot of distracting things (footnotes, citation refs, etc)<br>
<span id=x082>… DAISY has skippability that can be toggled</span><br>
<span id=x083>… Finally virtual pages, discussed but never resolved</span><br>
<span id=x084>… VitalSource has implemented something, as has Lars</span></p>
<p id=x085 class=irc><cite>&lt;ivan&gt;</cite> <a href="https://github.com/w3c/publishingcg/issues/73">w3c/<wbr>publishingcg#73</a></p>
<p id=x088 class="phone s03"><cite>George:</cite> But companies like Ebsco (???) could insert real page numbers, but they want it to be a generally used algorithm<br>
<span id=x089>… So other versions of the book would have the same page breaks</span><br>
<span id=x090>… Would like to hear what people think</span></p>
<p id=x094 class="phone s04"><cite>ivan:</cite> For 71, EDRlab may have a project going here - can we work with them?<br>
<span id=x095>… Are 70 and 73 related?</span></p>
<p id=x097 class=irc><cite>&lt;wendyreid&gt;</cite> <a href="https://docs.google.com/document/d/11GypOjE9xOTaINATl5bxVIA3Mc9jzNBGCr6GT_KNaQ4/edit?pli=1">https://<wbr>docs.google.com/<wbr>document/<wbr>d/<wbr>11GypOjE9xOTaINATl5bxVIA3Mc9jzNBGCr6GT_KNaQ4/<wbr>edit?pli=1</a></p>
<p id=x098 class="phone s04"><cite>ivan:</cite> The page numbers for 70 seem to be very related to 73</p>
<p id=x100 class="phone s03"><cite>George:</cite> Unless there is an alternative to page numbers</p>
<p id=x103 class="phone s04"><cite>ivan:</cite> Also related to annotations (want to refer to the text)<br>
<span id=x104>… need to reference the page somehow</span><br>
<span id=x105>… Need to anchor somehow</span></p>
<p id=x106 class="phone s03"><cite>George:</cite> These aren't shared annotations</p>
<p id=x118 class="phone s05"><cite>Hadrien:</cite> Not from EDRlab technically, but involved with them<br>
<span id=x119>… EPUB itself contains the annotations, then open the epub you get the annotations</span><br>
<span id=x120>… idea is it self contained</span><br>
<span id=x121>… tricky part is not just anchoring, but also context</span><br>
<span id=x122>… often need to embed a lot of information</span><br>
<span id=x123>… Also know percentage into the book, DOM ranges, etc</span><br>
<span id=x124>… need both anchors and context</span></p>
<p id=x129 class="phone s06"><cite>duga:</cite> Just wanted to say 70/73 are likely the same<br>
<span id=x130>… the TF determined that people only understand progress is through page numbers, no one likes %s, it makes 70 and 73 the same</span><br>
<span id=x131>… also the impression of the indexers</span></p>
</section>

<section>
<h3 id=t02>Anti counterfeit Task Force</h3>
<p id=x143 class="phone s07"><cite>liisamk:</cite> Anti counterfeit TF<br>
<span id=x144>… not much discussion since the start of the year</span><br>
<span id=x145>… We are socializing the ISCC in the hopes of bringing in more people</span><br>
<span id=x146>… We are kicking back up on Friday</span><br>
<span id=x147>… The next piece is digging in to how ISCC and ??? work together</span><br>
<span id=x148>… how to we start socializing the next piece of the trust chain</span></p>
</section>

<section>
<h3 id=t022>Fixed Layout Accessibility TF</h3>    
<p id=x150 class="phone s08"><cite>wendyreid:</cite> FL a11y TF</p>
<p id=x151 class=summary><a href="https://w3c.github.io/epub-specs/epub33/fxl-a11y/">https://<wbr>w3c.github.io/<wbr>epub-specs/<wbr>epub33/<wbr>fxl-a11y/</a></p>
<p id=x155 class="phone s08"><cite>wendyreid:</cite> Working on guidance doc for FL a11y - it is now in complete draft state<br>
<span id=x156>… please read and give feedback</span><br>
<span id=x157>… Mostly for publishers/authors, but there are also recs for RS at the end</span></p>
<p id=x159 class=irc><cite>&lt;ivan&gt;</cite> i/FL A11y TF/Topic: FL A11y TF/</p>
<p id=x161 class="phone s08"><cite>wendyreid:</cite> discuss media overlay, tables, etc<br>
<span id=x162>… will produces some samples</span></p>
<p id=x164 class=summary><a href="https://github.com/w3c/publishingcg/issues/69">w3c/<wbr>publishingcg#69</a></p>
<p id=x165 class=irc><cite>&lt;vince&gt;</cite> can someone repost the fixed layout guidelines here?  Sorry, I just joined the IRC now, and can't see any links above</p>
<p id=x167 class="phone s03"><cite>George:</cite> I heard that Hadrien recommended that if you could get correct reading order, we could claim accessibility for FL documents<br>
<span id=x168>… that is the biggest issue, getting things in the correct order</span></p>
<p id=x172 class="phone s08"><cite>wendyreid:</cite> Have discussed a reflowable mode<br>
<span id=x173>… It's still experimental, not in the main document</span><br>
<span id=x174>… would like to explore possibility of this and how to specify this for reading systems</span></p>
<p id=x176 class="phone s03"><cite>George:</cite> Would there be a validator?</p>
<p id=x177 class="phone s08"><cite>wendyreid:</cite> Still way too early</p>
<p id=x184 class="phone s05"><cite>Hadrien:</cite> Context - this is looking at the EU directive and what people can actually do<br>
<span id=x185>… For instance you need to able to do ??? and you can't, but we might be able to make a system that could</span><br>
<span id=x186>… We need to document how TTS actually works, very few people know</span><br>
<span id=x187>… Out of that work we can make a best practice document</span><br>
<span id=x188>… documenting would be the first step</span></p>
<p id=x192 class="phone s09"><cite>CircularKen:</cite> The document we have been working on is the start of what we will eventually be able to do<br>
<span id=x193>… already in the doc is reading order and image descriptions</span><br>
<span id=x194>… Then we can add an additional way to read it once we have this groundwork laid</span></p>
<p id=x195 class=summary><a href="https://github.com/w3c/publishingcg/issues/69">w3c/<wbr>publishingcg#69</a></p>
</section>

<section>
<h3 id=t03>Generate reflowable fixed layout books</h3>
<p id=x197 class="phone s01"><cite>wolfgang:</cite> One aspect is a11l and the other is adapting to different viewports</p>
<p id=x199 class=irc><cite>&lt;tzviya&gt;</cite> c/a11l/a11y</p>
<p id=x206 class="phone s09"><cite>CircularKen:</cite> Fundamentally need to start with well made and designed docs<br>
<span id=x207>… we should discard placement, etc and just have a simple replacement of CSS that disregards positioning and styling</span><br>
<span id=x208>… Then we have the order with descriptions, etc with page markers. Should plan on designed version and a stripped back reflow version</span></p>
<p id=x218 class="phone s08"><cite>wendyreid:</cite> Ken described it as we have it<br>
<span id=x219>… A lot of what we say now is text should be live (actual text), visual order and programmatic should match, we should have image descriptions</span><br>
<span id=x220>… Also some recs on what to do when you cross the fold (spread over 2 FL pages)</span><br>
<span id=x221>… That is the current emphasis. Follow best practices and the advanced stuff will follow</span></p>
<p id=x226 class="phone s02"><cite>AvneeshSingh:</cite> Have we looked at the problem from the other side?<br>
<span id=x227>… That is can we start with something that has all the proper structure, then create a FL doc entirely from CSS</span></p>
<p id=x228 class="phone s08"><cite>wendyreid:</cite> You mean convert reflow to FL?</p>
<p id=x231 class=irc><cite>&lt;Zakim&gt;</cite> tzviya, you wanted to respond</p>
<p id=x232 class="phone s02"><cite>AvneeshSingh:</cite> Yes, basically start with a proper flowing doc, then just apply CSS to make it look right</p>
<p id=x235 class="phone s10"><cite>tzviya:</cite> This isn't really considering how publishers work<br>
<span id=x236>… doing something like that is probably not feasible</span></p>
<p id=x248 class="phone s07"><cite>liisamk:</cite> There is a moment here to socialize good use of FL<br>
<span id=x249>… there are a lot of people who use FL when they just don't want to make a flowing doc</span><br>
<span id=x250>… because it is easier</span><br>
<span id=x251>… This may be a good opportunities to push people to flowing text since they are thinking about what it really means to make something FL</span><br>
<span id=x252>… very little needs to be FL</span></p>
<p id=x256 class="phone s08"><cite>wendyreid:</cite> We need to get people to question whether content needs to be FL<br>
<span id=x257>… Sometimes positioning helps with a11y (having images adjacent to text may help some readers)</span><br>
<span id=x258>… so sometimes FL can help a11y</span></p>
<p id=x263 class="phone s07"><cite>liisamk:</cite> This gets me back to mixed formats<br>
<span id=x264>… A single FL page in a reflowable book would be really nice</span></p>
<p id=x265 class=irc><cite>&lt;AvneeshSingh&gt;</cite> +1 Liisa</p>
<p id=x266 class=summary>Also +1 to Liisa</p>
</section>

<section>
<h3 id=t04>Extracting textual content</h3>
<p id=x277 class="phone s05"><cite>Hadrien:</cite> Goes way beyond extracting text<br>
<span id=x278>… eg language used</span><br>
<span id=x279>… Need a separate structure for TTS and creating reader mode</span><br>
<span id=x280>… though could use the same structure for both</span></p>
<p id=x285 class="phone s03"><cite>George:</cite> We are getting feedback from students with dyslexia that read aloud is inadequate for their needs<br>
<span id=x286>… I agree we need to improve the description of how it is done (highlighting, speed, etc)</span></p>
<p id=x287 class=irc><cite>&lt;wolfgang&gt;</cite> qß</p>
<p id=x289 class="phone s03"><cite>George:</cite> Need a lot of control in the TTS</p>
<p id=x297 class="phone s01"><cite>wolfgang:</cite> Next, how do we render in reflowable mode</p>
<p id=x311 class="phone s02"><cite>AvneeshSingh:</cite> This kind of thing is done by the screen readers<br>
<span id=x312>… Is there a need to tie this to FL?</span><br>
<span id=x313>… isn't more of a generic thing, how to extract and read the text?</span><br>
<span id=x314>… Seems like a big topics, and screen readers have researched it for years</span></p>
<p id=x319 class="phone s05"><cite>Hadrien:</cite> Agree, this is beyond FL<br>
<span id=x320>… some specific FL things do exist (e.g. small content chunks)</span><br>
<span id=x321>… but in general it should be for all epub</span></p>
<p id=x324 class="phone s08"><cite>wendyreid:</cite> ARIA wg is also interested in the same topic<br>
<span id=x325>… may even be become an all-web topic</span></p>
<p id=x329 class="phone s03"><cite>George:</cite> Do they join us or do we join them?</p>
<p id=x334 class="phone s08"><cite>wendyreid:</cite> Good question. May even need it's own CG. Hard to tell at this point</p>
</section>

<section>
<h3 id=t05>Webtoons</h3>
<p id=x338 class="phone s08"><cite>wendyreid:</cite> PMWG is discussing a potential change for this<br>
<span id=x339>… current proposal is to expand FLOW-CONTINUOUS to FL.</span></p>
<p id=x344 class="phone s11"><cite>laurent_:</cite> We did not discuss pronunciation for TTS purposes</p>
</section>
</main>


<address>Minutes manually created (not a transcript), formatted by <a
href="https://w3c.github.io/scribe2/scribedoc.html"
>scribe.perl</a> version 221 (Fri Jul 21 14:01:30 2023 UTC).</address>

</body>
</html>
